---
layout: post
title: "Discipline"
date: 2013-01-15 09:04
comments: true
categories: 
---

Being disciplined seems to be hard, something you are or not, no matter what.
People certainly talk that way. What I found is that being disciplined is quite
easy. It just takes some tricks and practice.

From time to time someone tells me I'm disciplined, mostly because of something
I did or said about something I'm doing. And after being called disciplined,
more often than not, I hear: "I could never do that, I wish I could, but I'm too
lazy." But here is the thing, you see, I'm lazy too, but I don't want to be. So
I keep myself from being lazy.

"I don't have the time" — That's what I thought. Then I got up a little bit
earlier every day. At first, just 30 minutes, which is enough to squeeze in 20
minutes of guitar practice every day. That's not a lot, but it's a lot more than
nothing. Repetition is key here. Then 30 minutes became one hour, then two.
Suddenly I could get a lot more done than before, by minimizing the time in the
evening I spent doing nothing and maximizing my morning, where I feel fresh
and productive.

"I could never get up that early" — If I had my alarm clock right next to my
bed, I too wouldn't. I'd turn the alarm off, go back to sleep and wonder what
the hell happened two hours later. But instead I put my phone, serving as the
alarm clock, on the other side of the room before going to bed. So when the
alarm goes off I have to get up, walk over there and turn it off, by which time
I'm already too awake to just go back to bed. Putting the phone on the other
side of the room also keeps me from lying in bed at night checking Twitter and
instead makes me pick up that book I wanted to finish.

"With all that free time I'd just do useless stuff" — I would do too. But what I
found is this: setting the right goals, as small as they may be, is one of the
biggest steps away from being unproductive and lazy. Spending an hour working
through that new programming book, practicing scales on the guitar or running in
the park seems like an awful lot. "I'll do that tomorrow then." Scratch that
hour, make it 20 minutes. When those 20 minutes are up, the task for today is
done, see you tomorrow. I'm not saying having huge goals is wrong, no, but I
found it a lot easier to get closer to achieving those by splitting them up in
several small steps and goals. The best thing about this, is that achieving
feels good, as small as the goal is, and certainly helps growing motivation to
do more, by keeping the fun and getting rid of that "I'm finally done, I'm glad
it's over" feeling.

I'm lazy by my own definition but I keep myself from giving in and instead try
to do things I'm proud of. Things, that don't make me feel "I wish I had done
something productive instead" the next day. The key to all this is my wish to
get better, to be more productive, to create more, to learn more and to spend my
time without regretting it later as wasted. When I feel that wish, that urge to
do something about my laziness, is when I set my goals low and put the alarm
clock on the other side of the room. That helps me tremendously when I feel like
making excuses and reading another trivial article online.

All my discipline is born out of the recognition of my laziness and my will to
do to something about it. The results are those tricks I play on myself to help
me get something done, to do something I'm proud of. With a little practice it
gets a lot easier, and I certainly look forward to my daily morning routine,
where I can achieve yet another goal.
